# Purpose of this file

An example shows a concrete use case for PLCnext Controls. 
It consists of usecases for PLCnext Technology framework functions.

An example comes only with source code (not runable) and without binary files. **The enduser has to compile and deploy the example by himself.**  

The example project contains the following:
1. Projectname    
    1. src
        1. programms
            1. XProgram.hpp / XProgram.cpp
        1. XYZ - Folder for non PLCnext Code.
            1. XYZ.hpp
        1. XComponent.hpp / XComponent.cpp
    1. intermediate
        1. Config - usually autogenerated Config files
        1. Code - usually autogenerated Library and Port files 
    2. this readme.md with proper information

The readme.md describes the purpose of the example and every necessary step to use the example.

please write detailed information about changes into the commit messenges.

(delete the above section)

# Introduction (Foreword)
- give a short overview to the project
- link to additional information on the topic

## Example details
|Description | Value |
|------------ |-----------|
|Controller | e.g.: AXC F 2152 | 
|FW | 2019.0|
|SDK | 2019.0|

- Fill in the applicable data for your project.  
- For license information, consider about **own** licenses as well as **third party** or **Open Source Software* licenses.
- Never forget to give information on the compatibility:
    - controller used
    - firmware used

## Preconditions

### List of links

## Compile

Give instructions using active speech, e.g.

1. do this
1. perform that
1. check here...

Inline `code` for commands

## Deploy

1. ...
1. ...

## Start-Up instructions

1. ...
1. ...
